---
layout: post
title: "Deep Work - Lessons I will apply to UX Design"
social: true
author: Maria Matveeva
twitter: "rgbcolor"
github: rgbcolor
summary: "When should you schedule deep vs. shallow work for a UX design
team?"
published: true
tags: design, process, UX design
---

Last week, I finished Kal Newport’s [Deep
Work](http://calnewport.com/books/deep-work/). I started out reading the
book, but about halfway through realized I’m getting a lot of value from
it and purchased the audiobook of it as well. This not only increased my
retention of the material, but allowed me to listen to it while doing
other things. I got through the book at least twice within three weeks,
a relatively fast pace for me.

![Deep Work book cover](http://calnewport.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/deep-work-cal-newport.jpg)

_Deep Work_ had many takeaways for my career as a whole, but it seemed
especially useful for running design processes. A key concept in the
book is the title, Deep Work: it is both the state and the ability to
concentrate on knowledge work, and is the opposite of a distracted
state. Kal argues that deep work is becoming more important _and_ more
scarce in the current economy.

## There is deep work in UX design

The first thing I considered was, which parts of my and my team’s jobs
deep work applies to. Does my entire day need to be deep? When is the
best time to schedule “shallow” vs. deep tasks?

1. One key activity where I see the most need for deep work is **the
Discovery phase of a project**. Specifically, the second half - once
we’ve opened up the playing field and outlined all the possible ideas
and directions in which we could potentially focus our effort, we must
narrow down to get to a realistic product definition. Kal describes this
process as operating with many variables and considerations in our
active memory. To keep this focus, we must perform deep work.
Distraction at this point is very costly, because it requires a long
time to get re-started even after a quick break.

2. Another key activity where I know deep work is needed is **the
wrap-up of a project**. The last week of design work (let’s say we’re
talking about a 5-6 weeks total) involves making detailed changes and
refinements to designs, as well as looking at the big picture to ensure
all needs are covered. The combination of detail focus and the “big
picture” in the active memory is quite taxing as it is. Even a quick
switch of focus to answer a question on another project will impact the
quality or speed of the wrap-up.


## There’s a time & place for less-deep work

In planning my and my team’s time I also need to consider activities
which can be performed in a more “shallow work” mindset. While we could
ideally have full focus all of the time, we do need to prioritize. Here
are some things that would suffer less from a shallow focus mindset, and
potentially even benefit from a  relaxed, improvisational atmosphere,
where group chatter and distraction can actually lead to new ideas.

1. Every project has some component of “**poking around**” or initial
research into visual style, the industry, or typical interactions of
a given type. (Do not confuse this with the deeper research and strategy
efforts, which are focused on getting very specific, hard-to-find
answers.)

2. In the **middle of the visual design effort**, with tasks and
priorities lined up and activities somewhat predictable, shallow work
may be acceptable. It’s still beneficial to keep sustained focus, but
the cost of focus switching is relatively lower.
3. **Collaboration and critique** (also called design reviews) can be a
great “shallow” activity. For example, when I check in with the team
to see how their day went, I might actually benefit from having a
shallower focus on their specific project. From this outsider
perspective, I can catch “obvious” things they may not have noticed due
to a deeper focus on the details, but avoid micro-managing and let folks
be professionals and own their own work.


## You may already be scheduling deep work

As I looked back on the way DockYard Design operates after reading _Deep
Work_, I noticed that we’re well on our way to creating a system that
supports deep work where needed. For example, when running design
sprints, we go “offline” - meaning we’re less available on Slack or by
email - for large chunks of the day. We also schedule time to catch up
on shallow tasks around those focused times: a typical in-person
collaboration would be scheduled 10–noon and 1–4, leaving an hour of our
workday in the morning and afternoon to catch up, document and regroup
with the team.

I also noticed (with no surprise) that a schedule heavily focused on
management cannot be fully tailored to maximize deep work. There will be
times when meetings, or urgent questions will take priority and the
amount of deep work I can schedule around them will be decreased.

## The main takeaways

If I were to summarize the key takeaways from the book, here’s what
you’d see:

1. Schedule deep and important work in large, unbroken chunks of time
first. Then, schedule shallower tasks together in batches around that.

2. Most people don’t consider their availability purposefully. With
modern communication tools, we’ve become available by default, and
it is costing us the ability to focus. If nothing else - question this
assumption, and consider the consequences of allowing yourself to be
distracted.

3. One interesting strategy to manage shallow work is to schedule a
specific, limited portion of your work day to tackle shallow tasks.
This way, the less-important tasks may not get done, but they will also
not prevent you from achieving the truly important goals, which require
deep work.

4. Kal proposes to measure the depth of any given task by imagining how
long it would take a bright and energetic recent college graduate to
train up to do the task for you. If the time is relatively short (e.g.
taking a couple of weeks to learn how to manage a social media presence)
then the task is shallow. If the time is long (e.g. taking several years
to learn how to create original academic research or acquire insight to
write a book) then the task is deep.

In conclusion - _Deep Work_ questions many assumptions about the way we
run our work lives, and proposes specific alternatives. The book is
structured as such a clear logical argument (perhaps, owing to Kal’s
background in the theory of computation and his academic writing) that
it’s hard to ignore the advice. It felt a bit repetitive as I was
listening to the introductory chapter (in a Dale Carnegie kind of way)
but I’m now reaping the benefit of that repetition by being able to
recite the argument back to anyone who’d care to listen. This is great
book for any knowledge worker, and I’ve confirmed that it’s useful for
anyone in a design role. I highly recommend it!
